Add blog post for improvements to data access (#72)
aiidateam/aiida-website: docs/news/posts/2024-10-04-data-access.md

---
blogpost: true
category: Blog
tags: usability
date: 2024-10-04
---

# Improvements in the ways to get your data out of AiiDA

Dear users, as the saying goes "Data is the Gold of the 21st Century", in today's blog post, we would like to showcase
improvements in how you can get your data out of AiiDA. We hope that these new features will enrich not only you, but
also the science you conduct.

## Dumping process data to disk

_From AiiDA's internal storage to classical file trees_

As you might be aware, AiiDA uses an SQL
[database](https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/v2.6.2/topics/storage.html), as well as an internal [file
repository](https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/stable/topics/repository.html#repository) [^1] to store
your data locally [^2].

> Both are optimized towards high performance and the difference between the typical file-system approach most of us are
> familiar with, and AiiDA's machine-readable internal data storage can make it difficult to get your data out of it in an
> easily accessible way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both are optimized towards high performance. The difference between the typical file-system approach (that most of us are
familiar with) and AiiDA's machine-readable internal data storage could make it cumbersome to get your data.
```

> Therefore, you, the user, is effectively forced to use the `verdi` CLI interface or AiiDA's Python API (e.g. the `QueryBuilder`) to access your data, making

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, you, the user, are effectively forced to use the `verdi` CLI interface or AiiDA's Python API (e.g. the `QueryBuilder`) to access your data, making
```

the transition towards AiiDA more challenging. Thus, to ease this transition, we have added functionality to dump AiiDA
`Process`es to disk in an intuitive directory structure via:

```shell
verdi process dump <pk>
```

The following video shows the result of running the command for a `PwCalculation` that was used to execute the `pw.x`
executable of Quantum ESPRESSO:

![PwCalculation dump](./_gifs/calculation-dump-white-10fps-2160p.gif)

> And for a more complex `PwBandsWorkChain` [^3]:

Reviewer: I would put the content of the footnote directly here and not as a footnote?

![PwBandsWorkChain dump](./_gifs/workflow-dump-white-10fps-2160p.gif)

> As you can see, the command works for both, individual calculations, as well as nested workflows [^4], resulting in
> the following output directories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, the command works both for individual calculations and for nested workflows [^4], resulting in
the following output directories:
```

**`tree` on a dumped example `CalcJob`**

```shell
dump-PwCalculation-54
├── README.md
├── inputs
│  ├── _aiidasubmit.sh
│  └── aiida.in
├── outputs
│  ├── _scheduler-stderr.txt
│  ├── _scheduler-stdout.txt
│  ├── aiida.out
│  └── data-file-schema.xml
└── node_inputs
   └── pseudos
      └── Si
         └── Si.pbesol-n-rrkjus_psl.1.0.0.UPF
```

**`tree -d ` on a dumped example `WorkChain`**

```shell
dump-PwBandsWorkChain-70
├── 01-relax-PwRelaxWorkChain
│  ├── 01-iteration_01-PwBaseWorkChain
│  │  ├── 01-create_kpoints_from_distance
│  │  │  └── inputs
│  │  └── 02-iteration_01-PwCalculation
│  │     ├── inputs
│  │     ├── node_inputs
│  │     │  └── pseudos
│  │     │     └── Si
│  │     └── outputs
│  └── 02-iteration_02-PwBaseWorkChain
│     ├── 01-create_kpoints_from_distance
│     │  └── inputs
│     └── 02-iteration_01-PwCalculation
│        ├── inputs
│        ├── node_inputs
│        │  └── pseudos
│        │     └── Si
│        └── outputs
├── 02-seekpath-seekpath_structure_analysis
│  └── inputs
├── 03-scf-PwBaseWorkChain
│  ├── ...
...
```

Therefore, after running the command once, you'll have all data involved in the execution of your workflow directly

> accessible, and can explore it with the Unix command line utilities we all know and love [^5].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
accessible, and can explore it as a standard folder [^5].
```
I'm changing this not only to make the sentence easier to read, but also because in principle you are not forced anymore to use a CLI, you can just open it in a file-browser window.

Reviewer 2: Also, "Unix command line utilities we all know and love" a bit biased 😅

Author: @edan-bainglass ofc, get out with your Windows machine :D ❤️

> So happy grepping!

Reviewer: Depending on whether you apply my change above, you need to adapt this or slightly clarify it. For instance "So, e.g., you can simply use `grep` to search for strings in the input and output files of the calculations!

## New QueryBuilder Syntax

_SQL queries, but intuitive!_

In addition to accessing raw files as outlined above, AiiDA's powerful SQL database allows querying for stored
`Node`s, which can be achieved with the `QueryBuilder` (as documented
[here](https://aiida.readthedocs.io/projects/aiida-core/en/v2.6.2/howto/query.html)). While using the `QueryBuilder` is
(at least for most of us) easier than writing raw SQL queries, its syntax usually requires some familiarization [^6].

Recent improvements have therefore enabled an alternative, more intuitive way to construct queries. Let us explain with
the following example: Assume you wanted to obtain all integers with `pk`s in a range between 1 and 10 (both excluded)
from a `Group` called "integers". You'd have to construct the following, rather convoluted query:

```python
from aiida import orm

qb = orm.QueryBuilder()
qb.append(
    orm.Group,
    filters={
        "label": "integers",
    },
    project=["label"],
    tag="group",
)
qb.append(
    orm.Int,
    with_incoming="group",
    filters={"and": [{"pk": {">": 1}}, {"pk": {"<": 10}}]},
    project=["pk", "attributes.value"],
)

> ```

Reviewer: Since not all might immediately understand what is going on, maybe you can briefly explain it? E.g. "after importing the needed modules in lines 1-2, we create a QueryBuilder object in line 4. In line 5-12 we filter for a group..."

```python
from aiida import orm

qb = orm.QueryBuilder()
qb.append(
    orm.Group,
    filters=orm.Group.fields.label == "integers",
    project=[orm.Group.fields.label],
    tag="group",
)
qb.append(
    orm.Int,
    with_incoming="group",
    filters=(orm.Int.fields.pk > 1) & (orm.Int.fields.pk < 10),
    project=[orm.Int.fields.pk, orm.Int.fields.value],
)
```

Through this, for example the filter on the values of the `pk`s reduces from:

```python
filters={
    "and": [
        {"pk": {">": 1}},
        {"pk": {"<": 10}},
    ]
}
```

to the more concise:

```python
filters=(orm.Int.fields.pk > 1) & (orm.Int.fields.pk < 10),
```

in which the `"and"` condition can be expressed via `&` and applied on the relevant entities. Furthermore,
accessing through the `.fields` attribute, e.g. in the updated `project`ion:

```python
project=[orm.Int.fields.pk, orm.Int.fields.value]
```

albeit being more verbose, is less error-prone than the access via string identifiers in the previous version:

```python
project=["pk", "attributes.value"]
```

as it allows for autocompletion.

> Any feedback on the new QB syntax welcome!

Reviewer: We never use `QB` above, spell it out

***

## Relevant PRs

For the more tech-savvy among us, here are the relevant PRs of the changes outlined in this blog post:

- [[#6276]](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/pull/6276) Add CLI command to dump inputs/outputs of `CalcJob`/`WorkChain`
- [[#6245]](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/pull/6245) ✨ NEW: Add `orm.Entity.fields` interface for `QueryBuilder`
  (cont.) [and linked PRs]

## Footnotes

[^1]:
    The file repository is based on the [`disk-objectstore`](https://github.com/aiidateam/disk-objectstore)
    implementation. If you ever wondered what the `_dos` appendix of the `core.psql_dos` and `core.sqlite_dos` storage
    backends means, now you know! 😉

[^2]:

>     While your workflows are being executed on the remote computer, files are located in a three level hierarchical

Reviewer: I would make sure this does not become confusing - the paragraphs above all refer to internal AiiDA storage, here to the scratch.
E.g. start with something like "The discussion above refers to the files and data stored by AiiDA on the computer where AiiDA is installed, and that is preserved in the long term. These files are e.g. retrieved from the remote computer once a calculation finishes, or could e.g. be parsed data or input data provided by the user. Instead, while your workflows ..." (maybe replace workflows with calculations? only those are actually on the remote).

Maybe the sentence could be changed a bit along these lines:

Instead, the execution of calculations on the remote computer are preformed in a subfolder of the `work_directory` of the given `Computer` (typically in the `scratch`), where the subfolder name is generated from the UUID of the AiiDA `CalculationNode`. This directory has a three-level depth, obtained by "sharding" the UUID as follows: if the UUID is for instance `6861d8fb-4694-46be-b0e6-7282989f069d`, the calculation will run in a subfolder named `68/61/d8fb-4694-46be-b0e6-7282989f069d`.

    directory structure under the `work_directory` of the given `Computer` (typically in the `scratch`), with folder names
    based on the universally unique identifiers (UUIDs) of the corresponding AiiDA `CalculationNode`s. For instance, if
    the UUID of your `CalculationNode` is `6861d8fb-4694-46be-b0e6-7282989f069d`, your files will be in
    `68/61/d8fb-4694-46be-b0e6-7282989f069d`. Tip: The `verdi calcjob gotocomputer <pk>` command provides a simple way to enter a
    shell session in the remote working directory of your calculation.

[^3]:
    Which actually contains the previous `PwCalculation` as one of its steps.

[^4]:
    The workflow is recursively traversed, and files are written to disk for each calculation. The subdirectory naming is
    automatically determined and based on the iteration counter, the link label, and the class name.

[^5]:

>     The `dump`ing feature is currently still actively developed to enable obtaining remote and stashed data entities (e.g., intermediate files of the workflow that weren't originally retrieved from the HPC), as well as allowing for

Reviewer: As a general comment, I don't know if using backticks as part of a longer work makes things readable. I would just write

The dumping feature

or

The `verdi process dump` feature

or e.g.

The dumping feature (via `verdi process dump`)

but avoid e.g. `dump`ing or similar - if you agree, I would change also the rest

---
blogpost: true
category: Blog
tags: usability

> date: 2024-10-04

Reviewer 3: This is not shown because the date is in the future. You have to import from `__future__`

      <th width="500px"> `tree -D ` on a dumped example `WorkChain`  </th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr width="600px">
      <td style="word-break:break-all;">

```shell
dump-PwCalculation-54
├── README
├── inputs
│  ├── _aiidasubmit.sh
│  └── aiida.in
├── outputs
│  ├── _scheduler-stderr.txt
│  ├── _scheduler-stdout.txt
│  ├── aiida.out
│  └── data-file-schema.xml
└── node_inputs
   └── pseudos
      └── Si
         └── Si.pbesol-n-rrkjus_psl.1.0.0.UPF

```

</td>
<td>

```shell
dump-PwBandsWorkChain-70
├── 01-relax-PwRelaxWorkChain
│  ├── 01-iteration_01-PwBaseWorkChain
│  │  ├── 01-create_kpoints_from_distance
│  │  │  └── inputs
│  │  └── 02-iteration_01-PwCalculation
│  │     ├── inputs
│  │     ├── node_inputs
│  │     │  └── pseudos
│  │     │     └── Si
│  │     └── outputs
│  └── 02-iteration_02-PwBaseWorkChain
│     ├── 01-create_kpoints_from_distance
│     │  └── inputs
│     └── 02-iteration_01-PwCalculation
│        ├── inputs
│        ├── node_inputs
│        │  └── pseudos
│        │     └── Si
│        └── outputs
├── 02-seekpath-seekpath_structure_analysis
│  └── inputs
├── 03-scf-PwBaseWorkChain
│  ├── ...
...

> ```

Reviewer 3: For me these render weird (see image it the end)

Author: Should be fixed now!

    <tr>
      <th width="500px"> Old `QueryBuilder` syntax </th>
      <th width="500px"> New `QueryBuilder` syntax </th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
  <tr width="600px">
      <td style="word-break:break-all;">

```python
QueryBuilder().append(
    Group,
    filters={
        "label": "integers",
    },
    project=["label"],
    tag="group",
).append(
    Int,
    with_incoming="group",
    filters={
        "and": [
            {"pk": {">": 1}},
            {"pk": {"<": 10}},
        ]
    },
    project=["pk", "attributes.value"],
)
```

</td>
<td>

```python
QueryBuilder().append(
    Group,
    filters=Group.fields.label == "integers",
    project=[Group.fields.label],
    tag="group",
).append(
    Int,
    with_incoming="group",
    filters=(Int.fields.pk > 1) & (Int.fields.pk < 10),
    project=[Int.fields.pk, Int.fields.value],
)

```

</td>
</tr>

  </tbody>
</table>

With the new syntax, `Node` attributes are directly accessible via
`.fields` and logic can be applied to them directly. Through this, for example the filter on the values of
the `pk`s reduces from:

```python
filters={
    "and": [
        {"pk": {">": 1}},
        {"pk": {"<": 10}},
    ]

> },

Reviewer 3: maybe
```suggestion
}
```

```

to the more concise:

```python

> filters=(Int.fields.pk > 1) & (Int.fields.pk < 10),

Reviewer 3: maybe
```suggestion
filters=(Int.fields.pk > 1) & (Int.fields.pk < 10)
```

Author: That's what happens when I don't ruff-autoformat the shit out of any code snippet I write :D

```

in which the `"and"` condition can be expressed via `&` and applied on the relevant entities. Furthermore,
accessing through the `.fields` attribute, e.g. in the updated `project`ion:

```python
project=[Int.fields.pk, Int.fields.value]
```

due is less error-prone than the string access in the provious version

```python
project=["pk", "attributes.value"]
```

thanks to autocompletion.

Feel free to explore the new syntax (any feedback welcome), and query away!

***

## Relevant PRs

For the more tech-savy among us, here are the relevant PRs of the changes outlined in this blog post:

- [[#6276]](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/pull/6023) Add CLI command to dump inputs/outputs of `CalcJob`/`WorkChain`
- [[#6245]](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/pull/6245) ✨ NEW: Add `orm.Entity.fields` interface for `QueryBuilder`
  (cont.) [and linked PRs]

## Footnotes

[^1]:
  The file repository is based on the [`disk-objectstore`](https://github.com/aiidateam/disk-objectstore)
  implementation. If you ever wondered what the `_dos` appendix of the `core.psql_dos` and `core.sqlite_dos` storage

>   backends means, now you know! 😉

Reviewer 3: obviously it is disk operating system

> 

Reviewer 3: Footnotes do not work properly. Maybe the linebreak?

Author: Hm, weird, they worked fine in the other blog post despite the linebreaks. Will have a look!

Author: Was the indent that was wrong...
